# CS4320-Exercise-4.1

## Systems Theory and Ethics – Edward Snowden

After reviewing the case of Edward Snowden from a systems theory perspective, it’s clear that the act of leaking classified U.S. government documents by Snowden was unethical yet in the public interest. Utilizing a graph to display intersections between ethics and systems, relationships become clear. Ethical quandaries exercise broader implications over not only the private lives of American citizens but also the economic interests of journalists and big tech companies.

Firstly, we examine issues regarding Snowden’s own career. He persuaded coworkers at Booz Allen Hamilton, a Hawaii-based IT consultancy, to leak login credentials to NSA computer systems. To even gain a position with the company, Snowden falsified information regarding collegiate-level education on his resume. Secondly, the careers of journalists were put in jeopardy when they received leaked classified information. Thirdly, private lives of U.S. citizens were on the line as revealed by leaked information: NSA officials consumed and profited from digital content of those they spied on, according to Snowden. Fourth, big tech companies saw their own interests under fire as programs to share data disclosed to consumers as “private” with U.S. government agencies were exposed. Finally, the biggest systems impacted by Snowden’s actions were military, national, and international operations of the United States. Leaked documents put at risk programs used to track and monitor threats internal and external to the country.

While most systems involved were directly and negatively affected by him, Snowden indirectly prompted a shift in worldwide opinion for Internet ethics. Pipelines for data became more secure and monitored following his leaks, a benefit to citizens around the globe that cannot be overlooked. The leaking of government documents regarding data collection and mining by Edward Snowden will always tread the ground between a moral decision and an ethical misstep.
